---
layout: post
title: Why we have such numerous junk DNA?
---

Humans have 98% junk DNA. We are the result of continuous evolution from a unicellular organism. You must have seen that certain characteristics of two organisms are the same. Based on that we classify organisms. I will give a reason for all this so the answer to the question is based on evolution and I will link it with junk DNA here.



Many millennia ago, the human genome was invaded by foreign DNA elements which then multiplied largely in number and then finally become a genetic part of our body. These foreign DNA act as a fossil record in our genome, which can be compared with the record from other species. Although they can't code for protein but can affect the function of protein-coding genes, so they are junk DNA. When the human genome sequence was released, it was surprising to realize that over 40 percent of the human genome is composed of these fossils’ DNA. These are called interspaced repetitive elements. As the name suggests, this is repetitive. There are 4 million of these elements. One class of these elements is present at 850,000 places throughout the genome and constitute over 20 percent of our DNA. You might be thinking why there is so much large number of these elements? The reason behind this is that they have a mechanism in which a single DNA element is copied to create multiple RNA copies and these RNA molecules can be copied back and reinserted into the genome. This increases the number of these elements and this has happened multiple times. We haven't developed any new insertion for 25 million years. This suggests that there is an upper limit to the number of these elements that we can tolerate, and we have reached that. As junk DNA affect the expression of the gene and change in gene expression change the character of the animal and thus this lead to the evolution of the organism. In light of junk DNA, this can also be the reason for the evolution of the organism. Research also suggests that these repeats can be cleared out of the genome also, and as long as the number of repeats is below the limit, the genome can be invaded by foreign DNA elements. In the case of Homo sapiens, these DNA elements are decreasing since the expansion of mammalian species. They are no longer undergoing copy and paste. If human DNA gets invaded by this DNA, then there is a chance of human revolution.

There is some dangerous consequence of this repetition also. They sometimes insert into or near protein-coding genes and may cause the protein to over-expressed or under-expressed. Mostly, these DNA repeats have proved to have great use because they are found all over the genome, vary a lot between individuals at each position. These DNA repeats constitute the majority of junk DNA.
