---
layout: post
title: How is a protein manufactured by the cell?
---

DNA is the fundamental information source in our cells, but DNA does not perform any of the body's basic functions required to keep us alive. It is the protein that does all the functions. DNA contains code for making proteins. DNA code is made up of only four letters - A, T, G, and C. DNA structure is like a ladder that is twisted around to form a spiral structure - a double helix. Here, A and G link with T and C respectively. This is known as the base-pairing principle. This is helpful during the replication of DNA.

Cells in our body divide continuously which is required for the growth of our body and to replace dead cells. The majority of cells divide by first copying their entire DNA and then dividing it equally between two daughter cells. This is done by an enzyme called the replication complex. For instance, let’s say if it recognizes a specific base A, then it will form T in a new strand and continue this according to the base-pairing principle. If wrong pairing occurs, the cell detects and corrects it. This replication occurs for 6 billion base pairs. In each newly synthesized DNA, one strand is from the parent and the second one is newly synthesized. The 50 trillion cells in our body are all the result of DNA replication from one zygote cell. You can imagine how fast DNA replication occurs. From one cell to 50 trillion cells in just nine-month.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/DNA_replication.gif" description="# DNA RNA Replication" %}

Now, coming back to how do cells read DNA code? Is there any direct way or indirect way? Cell machinery reads DNA code in blocks of three base pairs at a time. Each block of three base pairs is called a codon and this can be any combination of A, C, G, T, for example - AAT, ATG, GTC, etc. From four bases, it is possible to create a 4 × 4 = 64 codons. There are just 20 amino acids which are the building block for proteins. 64 codons are more than enough to code for 20 amino acids. A few codons don't code any amino acid. They work as the stop codons i.e., they tell cell machinery to stop coding sequence, but DNA does not directly code for protein. It does it through an intermediary molecule called mRNA (messenger Ribonucleic Acid). RNA polymerase unzips the right piece of DNA and forms an mRNA according to the base-pairing principle. It unzips the piece such that all the genes in a DNA become separate mRNA. mRNA consists of two types of sequence-exons (code for an amino acid) and introns (not code for an amino acid). When mRNA is first copied from DNA, it contains both introns and exons. After mRNA is created, introns are removed from mRNA and all exons are joined together to create mRNA that continuously codes for an amino acid. Then, amino acids join together to form a protein.

You must be wondering why not DNA produce amino acid directly instead of producing it through mRNA? This is to prevent the damaging of original DNA and also to allow control over the production of specific proteins.
