---
layout: post
title: How junk DNA affect the expression of the gene?
---

The scientist had known since the discovery of DNA structure that there were stretches of DNA that didn't code for proteins. But hardly anyone anticipated how important these regions would prove to be, nor that they would regulate the expression of the gene. Each cell contains two copies of any given gene. One was inherited from the mother and one from the father. Although there are two copies of each gene, the cell can create a thousand of protein molecules encoded by a specific gene. This is because DNA doesn't act as a direct template for protein. A single gene produces multiple RNA and each RNA molecule can act as a template for protein production multiple times, but there is a strange complication in this process. When genes split up to form RNA, there are some bits of code in between which do not code for protein. This is introns which are junk DNA. The cell removes this junk part and the process is called splicing. This junk part has a very big impact on the expression of that gene. Although it doesn't code for any protein mutation in this region can cause genetic disease which is very hard to treat. We have the same number of protein-coding genes as that of certain worms. The answer lies in that junk DNA called introns.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/introns.gif" description="Exons and Introns" %}

Humans can code for a different variety of protein from a single gene as compared to that of worms. Suppose a gene form mRNA called SXPXLXIXCXIXNXG. Here X is part that doesn't code for proteins (introns). Then, from this single mRNA, the protein produced by the cell will be SPLIC, PLIC, ICING, CING, or any combination you can think of. This is just an example. It might produce these proteins in different ratios in different cell types, but in the lower organism as there is less number of junk DNA, so the number of protein types is also low. In terms of the protein-coding gene, humans are majorly similar to many other mammals. But, ye there is a difference between them. This is because of junk DNA.

Junk DNA also protects protein-coding DNA from damage from the external environment. There is one protein-coding code per 49 junk code, so there is a one in 50 chance of being attacked by external damage. This is the insulation theory of junk DNA. This is extremely important as we are always subject to ultraviolet radiation from the sun. If the radiation results in the death of a cell, then it's OK. We have a lot of skin cells to replace them, but if the mutation causes the cell to survive better than the others, then that's a step toward the development of cancer. Despite controlling gene expression, junk DNA also protects us from damage from the external environment.
