---
layout: post
title: How DNA can solve the problem of future digital data storage?
---

DNA is the future of data storage. Recently, I watched a German Series named 'Biohackers'. I found out that an episode of this series was stored inside DNA. At first, I thought that this was an advertisement. Then, I found out that it really happened and it was done by a company named 'Twist Bioscience'. This was not done by Twist Bioscience for the first time. DNA storage has been done by many scientists before. I came to know about this for the first time. Actually, storing data in DNA is not a new thing. Our mother nature is doing it for several billion years. It is just that scientists have recently found out.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/feynman.png" description="Richard Feynman" %}

In 1959, Richard Feynman, in a [lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4eRCygdW--c), said that there is a plenty of room at the bottom. In today's world, we store all our crucial information in a data storage device. Why do we need DNA if we already have multiple devices to store the data? The answer is that DNA is non-degradable and it has more potential of storing data than the available modern drives. We can lose your data from a hard drive, but in case of DNA, the probability of data corruption is very low. Currently, the global demand for data is outpacing the world's storage capabilities. [Statista](https://www.statista.com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-created/) released that the total amount of data created, captured, copied, and consumed in the world is forecast to reach 59 zettabytes i.e., 59 trillion gigabytes in the year 2020. You can think of how much current storage devices we will need to store such a large amount of data.  
 
The question here arises is that how does someone store data in a DNA To store data in the DNA, the data file is converted into a binary digit sequence i.e., 0s, and 1s in which  the value of A=00, C=01, G=10, and T=11. Suppose if we want to encode a binary sequence 0010111010, then we will synthesize a DNA whose genetic code would be AGTGG. To retrieve the data, the DNA can be sequenced using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology and decode the binary digit sequence to data. Every time we sequence DNA we will lose it. So a copy of DNA is required before sequencing it.
  
Let's talk about DNA storing potential. The DNA inside a cell contains approx 3.2 billion letters of A, C, T, and G. We call a single binary digit as a *bit*. This means that each letter contains 2 bits of data and, since there are 3.2 billion letters inside a cell, each cell contains 6.4 billion bits of data. 1 Gigabyte (GB) is equal to 1 X 1024 X 1024 X 8 bits i.e., 8,388,608 bits (8.4 million bits approx). If we divide 6.4 billion by 8.4 million, it comes out to be approx 760. This means that a cell can store around 760 GBs of data. As already stated, there is 60 trillion GBs of data in this world. This much of data can be stored in approximately 80 billion cells. We can store this much amount of data in a handbag full of a test tubes containing cells. Humans contain 37.2 trillion cells. If we multiply it by 760, it comes out to be 29 Quadrillion GBs. Building a human being requires 29 Quadrillion GB of data. As I stated in my previous article, the data required to build a human being require Titanic full of storage device multiplied by 3000 times or even more.
  
Now coming back to its cost. According to the researcher from the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), the cost per megabyte to encode the data was $12,400 and for retrieval, $220. It is based on the storage, retrieval, and reproduction of over five million bits of data. The accuracy comes out to be 99.99% to 100%. IBM released its first-ever hard drive back in 1956. It weighed over one ton and it could hardly store a single mp3 song. The cost comes out to be $10,000. If we compare DNA storage costs with storage at that time, then DNA storage costs are not much more. Maybe in the future, we will build a pen drive that would contain cells inside it and can store millions of gigabytes of data. When we would plug it into a computer, it will make a copy of DNA and the built-in sequencer inside the pen drive will sequence the DNA code to bits, and then the computer will decode the bits to data and show it on the computer screen. And there is very little probability of data erase as DNA lasts for thousands of years. Instead of a huge server room, the server room will be very small which doesn't even need an ACs facility for cooling it as DNA can tolerate temperature up to 260° celsius.
