---
label: post
title:
---

Every living thing in this world from a single-celled organism to the largest organism on Earth is defined by its genes. The gene in DNA acts as an instruction manual for cells. Four nitrogenous bases are arranged together in a specific sequence in the DNA chain which tells a cell how to behave. Earlier it was not possible to change a single letter out of 3.2 billion letters of DNA code. It is like changing the needle in a haystack without disturbing the haystack.

But with recent advancements in gene editing tools, scientists can change an organism’s fundamental features in record time. We can genetically engineer embryo of human by changing the code of gene which produce *myostatin* protein (it decreases muscle growth) to decrease its production in the body and thus the baby born will be highly muscular just like Captain America. We can prevent the outbreak of infectious diseases like CoViD-19 and develop a cure for genetic diseases. All this can be done using CRISPR-Cas9. This technology is the fastest, easiest, and cheapest of all the gene-editing tools. CRISPR stands for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/dandc.jpg" description="*Doudna* and *Charpentier*" %}

You might be thinking about how it works and who invented this? The inventor of this technology Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier got awarded the Noble Prize in Chemistry this year. Surprisingly, CRISPR is a natural process. This is used by bacteria's immune system to fight against the invading virus. This naturally occurring technology uses two main components. The first is a short repeat of DNA sequence called CRISPR. The second component is Cas or Crispr associated protein which is molecular scissors that chop up DNA. Now coming back to its mechanism. When a virus invades a bacterium, *Cas* protein cuts out a segment of the virus's DNA and paste it into the bacterium CRISPR region. Those viral codes are then copied into short pieces of RNA. This RNA then binds with *Cas-9* protein to form a protein that functions as a sentinel in the cell and search for a match for the viral code. When the virus invades again, it recognizes the virus and *Cas-9* protein destroys the viral DNA. Now, the catch here is that we can use this CRISPR mechanism to target, not just viral DNA but any DNA in almost any organism. By simple tools, this bacterial immune system is harnessed as the precise gene-editing tool which can alter DNA code and change a specific gene.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/crispr.png" description="CRISPR *Cascade* protein (cyan) bound to CRISPR RNA (green) and phage DNA (red)" %}

You might be thinking about the method of using it in the lab. We need to make a guided RNA to match the code we want to edit and attach it to the Cas-9. Like the viral RNA in the bacterial CRISPR, the guided RNA directs Cas-9 to the target gene and Cas-8 cuts the DNA at a specific point. Once the DNA is cut, the cell tries to repair it using non-homologous ways in which the protein called nuclease trim the broken end and join it as it is before. However, if we add a separate sequence of template strands of DNA with edited code to the CRISPR complex, the cell performs homologous ways of DNA repair. This template DNA is used as a blueprint to guide the rebuilding process, repairing a defective gene, or even inserting a completely new one. This technology raising a lot of big ethical questions due to its implications, but yet it's a powerful tool for studying the genome.
